Good morning.
Welcome to session 118,
Advanced Document-Based
Application Techniques.
My name is Mark Piccirelli.
I'm an engineer in the
Cocoa Frameworks Group.
So Cocoa has always had
a great architecture for
document-based applications,
doing the standard sort of
things like opening documents,
saving documents,
even gives you a little help with
printing and undo and things like that.
So if you know how,
you can do a lot of different
clever things with it.
I'm going to show you some
of the clever things today.
And also, stuff I want to show you is
some of the new features that
we introduced in Tiger that we'd
like you to take advantage of.
So prerequisites.
Hopefully you've already worked a
little bit with NS Document and friends.
The sample code I'm going to show you
today depends a lot on Cocoa bindings,
so hopefully you've been
experimenting with that.
Understand the concepts behind
key value coding and key
value observing compliance.
And the classes we're specifically
going to spend a lot of time
with today are NS Document,
NS Document Controller,
and Window Controller,
and subclasses of our own making.
*sniff*
So what you'll learn.
Good error handling is important,
and we've made some improvements
in Tiger that makes that
easier for you to do properly.
Supporting new file formats
with a plugin architecture,
we've opened up our document type
API a little bit to help you there.
Auto-saving,
a new feature we added in Tiger.
Multiple windows per document,
and multiple documents per window.
So today's sample app is Sketch 2.
We are rewriting it to take
advantage of all the features we've
added in the last several years.
Actually, I say we, I really mean I.
It doesn't take more than
one person to rewrite Sketch.
So good error handling,
a good Macintosh application helps
the user when things go wrong.
It gives them a good description
of what went wrong and if possible,
a suggestion of what they
can do to fix the problem.
So in Panther,
we introduced a class named
NSError and used it in a few places.
But we didn't use it in NSDocument.
NSDocument's error handling hadn't really
caught up to what was possible yet.
So the result was error
alerts like this one,
which is not even remotely
HI guidelines compliant and is
unfortunate in a variety of ways.
So there are ways in Panther and
earlier versions for your app
to present good error alerts,
but it was hard.
Number one,
how do you get on this document
not to present its not so good
error alerts and things like that?
So for Tiger,
we made a bunch of improvements.
If you don't do anything to take
advantage of the improvements,
the worst thing you'll see
is an error alert that though
it's not very descriptive,
at least is HI guidelines compliant.
So in this example, the document Migrate
Sketch cannot be opened.
It doesn't have the word error there,
you know, no kidding.
It just has a sentence
saying what went wrong.
Now, for very simple applications,
even in Tiger,
you might see something like this,
something really descriptive.
The document Migrate
Sketch cannot be opened.
You do not have appropriate
access privileges.
And this document's code sends
the error and is causing this
error alert to be presented.
And at the bottom,
it even has a little bit
of a recovery suggestion.
To view or change access privileges,
select the file in the
finder and choose File,
Get Info.
So that's pretty helpful to the user.
So what do you have to
do to take advantage?
Because very often for backward
binary compatibility reasons,
in old applications,
you just get the plain error alert
with really not much description.
Well, what you have to do is you have to
stop overriding the NSDocument and
NSDocumentController methods that
don't have a place to return NSErrors.
So instead of overriding read from
file of type or write to file of type,
override read from URL of type error,
write to URL of type error.
So the first two methods that
you see there are now deprecated.
And of course, you know,
your application still works.
We still invoke your overridden
methods even if they're deprecated.
But if you remove those overrides
and override the new ones instead,
the passing of the errors up and
down the stack works much nicer.
So,
and this applies to both the NSDocument
and the NSDocumentController.
Check out the documentation
and the release notes.
We deprecated a lot of methods
in Tiger and replaced them
all with something better,
even if, you know,
the something better was just
adding a place to return an error.
So, demonstration.
Let's update Sketch for
better error handling.
So here I have a version of
Sketch that is pretty much rewritten,
but I left--
The old style reading and
writing methods in place.
So read from file,
Sketch doesn't actually
have to override this.
If you've worked with NSDocument,
you know there's a series of
method indications that happens
during reading and writing,
and the default implementation
of each invokes something that's
a little easier to override.
So read from file, you know,
the default implementation of it
actually gets an NSData and then
invokes low data representation.
Actually,
there's another level in between
there that involves file wrappers.
But in this example, you know,
both of these are invoked.
So and then this method,
this class still overrides the old
style low data representation of
type and data representation of type.
And if we, you know,
open a file to which we
don't have read access,
you just get a very simple error alert.
The document, a few circles,
without enough permissions,
that's the name of it, cannot be opened.
[Transcript missing]
And let's replace our override of this
old data representation of type method.
with the newer data of type method
that has a place to return an error.
And we save that, and we build it,
and we run it.
And we try and open the same file again,
to which we don't have permissions.
And we get the same error alert.
It's not very descriptive.
What went wrong?
Well, in SKT DrawDocument,
the subclass of NSDocument,
we still have this override
of this old deprecated method.
So NSDocumentController,
NSDocument machinery for backward
binary compatibility overrides it.
And once you start--I'm sorry,
invokes it.
And once it starts down this
backward binary compatibility path,
calling all these deprecated methods
that don't have a place to return errors,
it stays on that path.
So the best you'll get is an
error that is not ugly but is
not very descriptive either.
So let's replace that to--
with the method that
replaces it in Tiger,
an override of the method
that replaces it in Tiger.
So read from URL of type error.
And one of the things we
did while introducing all
this new API and NSDocument,
Document Controllers,
made up our mind whether we
wanted to use file paths or URLs.
So we went with URLs.
So we build it and run it.
And we open that file to which
we do not have permission.
And it puts a very
descriptive error alert up.
And that's a good thing.
This error alert actually, in particular,
this NSError was returned by an
NSData method that NSDocument
called to get the data that
it passes to read from data.
So NSData returned the NSError.
NSDocument fiddled with it a little
bit to put it in the context of a
document error and then presented
it to the user using an API,
if you check the release
notes in the documentation,
which is really very open.
And there are many,
many customization opportunities
for presenting errors.
what you just saw was
that what you want to do,
as soon as your application
can depend on Tiger,
get rid of your overrides of the
old methods and avoid the backward
binary compatibility code path.
You know,
your application will work but the error
alerts won't be as good as they could be.
And you'll trigger, you know,
better default error presentation.
And--oh, something I didn't show it.
There are lots of opportunities
for you to return errors,
you know, in those overrides,
those methods that you saw.
If your application is
what senses the error,
you can create an NSError object
very easily and return it.
And if you check the
documentation for NSError,
it's very powerful.
It has places for showing for a
description of the error and a failure
reason for the error which is just part
of that that's used some of the time.
And, you know, recovery suggestions,
recovery options for putting, you know,
buttons on the error alert,
all sorts of stuff.
So have a look at that.
So plug-in architectures.
Over the years I've had a bunch
of questions and requests from
people who wanted to make their
applications more flexible.
They wanted to ship an application
and add support for new file formats,
either importing or
exporting after the fact.
Either they ship the plugins themselves
or they allow third parties to ship them.
And NS Document Controller didn't
really have enough API to
make this easy for you.
If you did it,
you ended up doing it all yourself.
You ended up having to
reproduce a lot of the work that
NS Document Controller does.
To make that unnecessary,
we've opened up the
document type API in Tiger.
And the gist of the change is that if
your plugins support new file formats,
you want them to get used by
AppKit's default machinery.
So what we've done,
we've added a few new methods to
classes like NSDocumentController.
DefaultType,
which is the name of the type
for new documents if the user
selects new from the file menu.
Type for contents of URL error
when the user's opening a document,
what type is it?
And document class names,
if your plugin architecture
is so powerful that you allow
it to add new subclasses of
NSDocument to your application,
well, we can accommodate that
now without too much.
And then there's a few other old
methods that have been there,
like type from file extension
and document class for type.
They've always been there,
but a lot of them weren't invoked
when you would expect them to be.
You would override them, and you're like,
hey, my override's useless.
We now very consistently use public
API when you would expect it to be.
And that was for document opening.
For document saving,
roughly the same situation.
There's a new method in NSDocument,
a writable type for save operation.
If your document, you know,
sometimes when you support exporting,
you can't export specific document
formats because the document is
using some feature that won't be
representable in that file format.
If you have complicated
situations like that,
you have total control now over
what the user sees in the save
panel and things like that because
you can just override this method.
And it returns, you know,
an array of type names and you can
fiddle with that array all you want.
And existing class methods like
writable types and isNativeType are now,
again,
invoked when you would expect them to be.
So for a demonstration,
I kind of made up a problem for myself
so I could solve it using plugins.
Sketch 2 uses a new native file format.
It uses a new style property
list so it gets to put numbers
in them instead of having to,
you know, make strings out of everything
and put it in there.
But any good application that
updates its file format still has
to open documents of the old format.
So in Sketch,
we'll add support for that old file
format using an importer plugin.
So here we are in Sketch,
and I added just a really
simple plugin architecture,
and I didn't want to
get too clever up here.
And where is it?
Just to a subclass of
Document Controller,
I just put the stuff in there.
There's a few new public methods,
not public methods, methods on this
Document Controller subclass.
Exporter for type, where type is an
NSDocument-style type name.
Importer for type, and the entire list of
exporters and so on.
And just when the
Document Controller is initialized,
it just routes around in a
directory for all the bundles,
whose file name extension
is SketchPlugin,
and instantiates the principal
class out of those bundles
and adds them to its list.
And in SKT Draw Document,
we use this stuff in a few places.
So in our override of read from data,
read from data has passed a type name,
which has already been figured
out by the document controller.
And this override, you know,
it checks to see if the type
is one of the ones that it
natively knows how to read.
And if not,
it just asks Document Controller, "Hey,
is there an importer for
that type?" And if there is,
it just invokes this method,
which is defined on the importer class.
I'll show you that.
From data,
get graphics and the print info and
an error if something goes wrong.
So it's very specific to Sketch.
And the other thing that an importer
is responsible for telling its
users is what type it is it's
importing and what the valid file
name extensions are for that type.
In Sketch, updating the file format,
the file name extension is now Sketch 2.
This importer understands
the old Sketch file name
extension and also Draw 2,
which is an old sketch
file name extension.
an older one.
So if we were to run this,
this wouldn't work right now,
because we haven't overwritten any of
the methods that I was just telling
you about to tell NSDocumentController
about the types that are available now.
So let's add overrides for that.
And the first thing to
do is in NSDocument,
override a couple of methods.
Readable types, SKT Draw Document,
in addition to the types
that NSDocument has found by rooting
around in your Info.plist can also
read the types that are supported
by various importers that are
installed in the application.
So it gets the list of
importers and asks each one,
you know, what's your supported type and
adds it to the list and returns
that to who's ever asking.
And typically who's ever
asking is NSDocumentController.
You're not supposed to have to care.
And the same thing for writable types.
It just roots around in the list of
exporters asking each one what's your
supported type and adds it to the list.
But that by itself would not be enough.
It's required, but it's not enough.
We also have to override a couple,
excuse me,
A couple of NSDocumentController methods,
too.
So NSDocumentController
has a few methods.
The default implementations of all of
which just root around in information
found in your application's Info.plist.
But if we want to support
different file extensions,
we're going to have to tell it how
to figure out the document type
from a specific file extension.
And here we just use the
importers to accomplish that.
So we get the list of importers and
And we check to see if this particular
file name extension is in the set of
extensions supported by the plugin,
and if so, we say that the type for this
file extension is the one
supported by this importer.
And another thing we have to
override is Document Class for Type.
Our plugin architecture is
not that super whiz-bang,
so it doesn't let you add new subclasses
in this document to the application.
But what it does say is that for any
particular type that's been found
using importers and stuff like that,
the Document Class is going
to be SKT DrawDocument,
because that still gets instantiated
for different importer types.
and file extensions from type
is used in the save panel,
oh, and also in the open,
when presenting the open panel.
For a particular type,
what is the list of file extensions
that corresponds to that type?
Let's build that and run it.
So this particular file
that we're opening,
an old...
There we go.
An old sketch document that sketch.
This isn't--oh, hey,
you know what I forgot to do.
If you're going to support
a plugin architecture,
you really ought to build the plugins.
Let's try that again.
So that's what happens,
so you get to see what happens
when there is no plugin available.
In the open panel, it's disabled.
Now when we make the plugin available,
when we built it,
we just dropped it in the spot
where Sketch could find it.
There we go.
Now this file with the old file
name extension on it is recognized.
So, and it opens just fine.
So that's it for importers.
So what you just saw.
I'd already added a simple
plugin architecture to Sketch.
I didn't really walk you through
all the code and detail of how
I designed that very simple stuff.
Well, it wasn't that simple,
but how I designed that
relatively straightforward stuff.
We hooked it up so that it could be
used in document opening and saving
by overriding the NSDocumentController
and NSDocument methods that are invoked
when the app kit needs information.
And now it reliably invokes
those overridden methods.
So autosaving.
More new API that we introduced in Tiger.
It's a feature of NS Document.
What it does is it helps the user,
it's the same thing you've seen
in a number of other applications,
it helps the user recover from
things like application crashes,
perhaps caused by poorly written plugins,
power failures, and things like that.
Things like that, I mean, you know,
kernel panics, cosmic rays,
things like that.
So, it's not on by default.
We explored the idea of like, hey,
is this a feature we can add to
every NS Document-Based app and
they'll just get it for free?
And no, we couldn't do that at all.
So, you have to explicitly turn it on.
But turning it on is pretty easy.
Basically,
what turning it on requires is that you
have to add a little bit of UI for this,
for the preference for this.
Users don't always want auto-saving.
And your document saving code has
to follow the rules that have been
in the documentation for a while.
For example, in an override of a method
that has write in the name,
it passes in, you know, a URL.
Actually, just write the file to that
URL regardless of the current
location of the document.
Don't invoke file URL or file name
as it was called in Panther before
we added a bunch of new API.
Don't assume anything that
there's a relationship between the
current document's location and
where we're asking you to write.
Even before this,
we've been asking you to write in,
you know, a folder,
a directory inside the temporary folders.
Then we'd play, you know,
FS Exchange object games
and things like that.
So, the final version of the
file would be in the folder.
You would be happy.
And, you know, various metadata wouldn't
get stripped off.
But now with this auto-saving feature,
it's one step more important that
when NSDocument tells you to write
a file by invoking your override
of one of the writing methods,
just write it right there
and don't do anything else.
So, let me show you.
I will turn it on and sketch.
Actually,
it's already turned on in Sketch,
but let me walk you through
what we did to do that.
First of all,
we had to add a new preference panel,
Sketch's first preference.
A simple checkbox,
whether or not the user wants
us to autosave documents or not,
and if so, how often.
And by how often,
I mean from the time that the
user modifies the document,
how long should NSDocument
wait before it autosaves.
If you have it doing it every one second,
it'll get annoying,
but once an hour leaves a lot of time
to lose work if something goes wrong.
Thank you.
So, and the way we set up this UI,
we used bindings.
It was pretty simple on this half of it.
The value of this checkbox
is just bound to a key path
that's in the user defaults,
auto-saving documents, a Boolean value.
And the value for the delay, you know,
how long before, you know,
between when the user modifies
a document and it's auto-saved,
you know, the delay in seconds is also
saved in the user preferences.
And that's pretty much all it takes
to get that preferences panel up and
saving stuff in the user defaults.
Now,
to get stuff out of the user defaults,
I use bindings in a way that
I guess is kind of novel.
Not a lot of people have done it yet.
The problem that has to be solved
is that what you saw in the UI is
that there's a checkbox and a number.
But in the API for this
document controller,
there's just a number,
the autosaving delay.
And if the delay is zero,
then it doesn't autosave.
But of course,
that isn't the kind of thing
you would want to represent in
the UI to the user directly.
Type a zero if you don't want autosaving.
Not good enough.
So we put the checkbox,
we put the custom value.
So we end up with these two numbers.
We have to make them,
we end up with these two values.
We have to make them just one number
to show it on this document controller.
And the way I set it up is that
I added bindings to my app delegate.
Why did I put it in the app delegate?
Because it was there.
And, you know, this didn't deserve like
a whole other class.
So, and there's other ways to
do this besides bindings.
But I was kind of
experimenting a little bit.
So what we did is an interesting feature.
What we did is take advantage of an
interesting feature of the default.
Implementation of key value binding.
If you bind an object, any doc,
any object,
even like the app delegate like this.
And it doesn't have, you know,
binding support already.
The default implementation of key-value
binding will just use key-value coding
to set the value as it's changed.
So we bind our--
Our app delegate to the user
defaults using this key,
it's just, it's the same,
The key is autosaving documents,
and there's another one, autosave delay.
And we just use the same key that we're
using to put it in the user defaults.
So we bind the app delegate
directly to the user defaults.
Now because we bound that,
what that means is that key value binding
is going to use key value coding to tell
the app delegate when the value changes.
So we have to be key value coding
compliant for these two keys,
the autosave documents, yes or no,
and the autosave delay.
And all we had to do to do
that was to add two methods,
autosaving documents
and set autosave delay.
So, and in both cases,
they do the right thing.
It boils down to an invocation of
this NSDocument controller method,
setAutoSavingDelay.
So if autosaving,
then we set the delay to the
real number of users typed in.
If that checkbox is not checked,
then we just set it to zero.
So actually,
you can see these get invoked.
[Transcript missing]
I don't know if you
can see this too well,
but it's invoking our set
autosaving delay method.
And what happened is basically
the value went from bindings.
It got set in the user defaults,
and because user defaults
is KVO compliant,
you know,
observable for a number of things,
it bounced right back up
into this bindings that we'd
added to the app delegate.
So is this definitely the
least code way to do this?
I'm not really sure,
but at least we didn't have to
write anything that directly,
you know, read or wrote to user defaults.
So, and we'll set the value to
something nice and short.
We're not going to wait a minute
here to see auto saving happen.
And before we start
pretending to crash the app,
we should probably save that in defaults.
And now when the program starts up,
the binding stuff is telling the app
delegate what the values were that
were stored in the user defaults.
Okay, so now autosaving is on.
Let's see it in action.
Let me leave some space
over here on the desktop.
I'll open a file on the desktop.
Oops.
And just add a few things to it.
So this is the file we
just saved on the desktop,
our document.
Now the document's not modified at all,
but if we modify it by just dragging
a graphic or something like that,
and wait three seconds.
There's the autosave document
contents right next to it.
So, and this works for
untitled documents too.
If we go into our home directory and
under library autosave information,
You can see it's already stored
the property list there where
it's pointing to this document
that is already auto-saved.
If we make a new untitled document
and just do anything to it,
It just gets saved in that same
folder in your home directory.
So, and let's hear it for the finder
for showing that so quickly.
So let's crash our app by just-- oh,
there's so many ways to do it.
Yes.
So I'll just restart it.
And there are those two
autosaved documents right back.
So, and as you can see--
And as you can see,
the Document Modified button in
the window close control is set.
And what that means is that no
matter how much you undo or redo,
you're never going to get this
document to the point where it's
not going to ask you if it should
be saved when you close the window.
[Transcript missing]
And by the same token,
if you just close a document,
throw it away,
[Transcript missing]
So what you just saw is, you know,
stuck in a demonstration of something
novel that you can do with bindings.
And our modified documents
got autosaved automatically.
And it didn't take a lot of code.
You know, that code I showed you,
that was all the code I added to
Sketch to support this feature.
There was nothing new to do in
NSDocumentController or NSDocument.
It's just all built into NSDocument.
Now, there's still nice customization
opportunities for you.
In Tiger,
we introduced a new kind of save
operation enumeration that gets passed
around between those different methods.
So if you want to know whether or not
a particular saving that your document
is being asked to do is for autosaving
or save or save as or save a copy,
you can find that out.
But if you're just doing something
simple that reads and writes,
it all just works.
So multiple windows per document.
This is something that's
always been an AppKit,
but there's never really been much
of a demonstration of it before.
An NS document was designed for this,
in contrast to something I'll
show you right after this.
Every NS document owns one
or more window controllers.
So if you have a UI, for example,
I think a popular
example is when you have,
like, a 3D modeling tool, and there's,
you know,
the shaded version showing in one window,
and the 3D, you know,
wireframe in another window,
and you're showing a bunch of
windows onto the same document,
and you don't want to really
close the document until
all the windows are closed.
This is the kind of UI I'm talking about.
And also you can see this
in Interface Builder,
where it has the, you know,
the main window showing you the
instance view or the class view,
and then the actual windows
or menus of the app.
So every document in this architecture
owns one or more window controllers,
and every window controller has a window.
Every window controller
points back to its document,
so it's a bidirectional connection.
And the interesting thing is that
you can add window controllers
to an already open document,
whenever you feel like it.
And the kind of architecture
you end up with looks like this.
A document controller pointing to,
you know, zero or more documents pointing
to one or more window controllers,
each of which points to a window.
And if you're supporting a
multiple windows per document UI,
you can do a lot of this stuff
without NSDocument's help.
So why even tell NSDocument
about the window controllers that
are pointing to the document?
Well,
it does a bunch of convenient things.
Number one, at startup time,
it tells the window controller about
itself to establish a connection.
It already has a mechanism built in
for when the windows should be shown.
It tells all of its window
controllers that it knows about
when the document itself is edited,
so that it can set that little
window title bar close button thingy.
And it also does interesting
methods like synchronize window
title with document name.
So if you try this in
something like Sketch,
go ahead and go to the finder with a
document that's open and rename it,
or turn off file name extension hiding,
or whatever you want.
And when you switch back to Sketch,
the window title will just
be updated automatically.
So this is the kind of stuff it does.
And of course,
the document will tell all the window
controllers it knows about to close
themselves when it itself is closed.
And as far as closing goes, you know,
it has some rules built in
for what does this mean.
Are you closing this window?
Are you closing the document
at the same time or what?
So as a demo,
let's just real quick enable multiple
windows for document and sketch.
And basically all we're doing is
to our window controller class,
because I didn't think this really
went in the NSDocument subclass,
even though this particular
action will work there too,
new document window.
So all this does is it creates a sibling
window controller and adds it to the
document and then tells it to show.
And as a nicety,
for this particular action,
we did a menu item validation that
tries to put up a window or a menu item
title that's a little bit descriptive.
So a new window for a specific
document instead of saying new window.
So let's run it and open up a document.
and hold down the Option key
because I made this a
mini-weight of an alternate.
And so just new window for our document.
[Transcript missing]
So, an NS document nicely enforces
behavior like you close one window,
Okay, fine.
The document still has a window.
So only when you close another
window does it bother putting
up the save preference.
[Transcript missing]
So what you just saw, NSDocument,
you know, we took advantage of a feature
that NSDocument has always had.
We just had to add a little
bit of code to trigger it.
Now, something that's going to
involve a bunch more code is
multiple documents per window.
This is the kind of UI where in preview,
if you open up a bunch of
TIFF documents at once,
it'll open them all up in the same
window and have a drawer on the side
with a thumbnail and all that stuff.
And it's tricky.
I really mean that.
It's tricky, because then it's
Document Window Controller.
We're not designed for this.
But you can do it.
So, and the things that are in, you know,
the design that makes this difficult
is the fact that NS documents
create and own window controllers.
Well, that's a fine pattern
in simple applications,
but if you have a window
controller that's displaying the
contents of multiple documents,
you know, that's not a good assumption.
And then this document controller
doesn't know anything really
about window controllers.
All it knows is that it tells
documents that it opens to
make new window controllers.
It doesn't do anything,
any of the stuff that we need in this
case that I'm about to show you about,
you know, managing window controllers.
When do they get created?
When do documents get associated
with them and stuff like that.
So, but that's okay.
All we have to do is, you know,
make a couple UI decisions,
make up rules for when new
windows are created and therefore
new window controllers and what
documents get associated with them.
And then we have to subclass to make
a smarter document controller class.
We're also going to have to
deal with some assumptions that
this window controller makes.
A window controller,
its default implementation in the AppKit,
can only point to one document.
Well, that's not good enough
for what we want to do,
but that's okay.
What we have to know is the what's and
the when's of the messages that are
sent back and forth between document
and window controller so we can override
some of the methods and things like that.
The good news is they're all public.
There's no SPI back chatter secretly
between window controller and documents,
so we can see everything
that's going on and change it.
And we'll basically just subclass
to make a smarter window controller.
And what we'll end up with is this,
an object diagram like this.
A document controller kind of temporarily
pointing to a window controller.
You know, it creates it,
adds a bunch of documents to it,
and then forgets about it.
But the document controller, as always,
will still keep a pointer
to a bunch of documents.
And the window controller will
now point to a bunch of documents,
and documents will still
point to a window controller.
And, you know,
the nice thing about what's there in
the AppKit is that even though it wasn't
designed with this in mind at all,
the fact that the API is pretty
good and it's nice and public,
you know,
allows us to rearrange things into an
object diagram that doesn't look at all
like the last one that we showed for,
you know, multiple windows per document.
So let's do that.
Let's trigger this feature in Sketch.
So the first thing I want to show
you is the nib that we made for this.
And for this demo,
this work on Sketch 2 right now,
I'm not fooling around with
having a drawer with neat
thumbnails and stuff like that.
But that would be nice to do someday.
All I did was use bindings
to add this pop-up.
This will be our document selector here.
And if you look at the
bindings that are used in it,
It binds to the files owner,
which is a window controller,
and it's binding to
the list of documents.
That's what it's going to present.
Specifically,
what the user's going to see is a
new property that I added to this
document called Notifying Display Name.
And when the user selects
something in Selected Object,
that's going to change the
document of the window controller.
Yeah, and one thing to keep in
mind with that is that,
you know, this documents property,
this is something that we're adding
to our subclass of window controllers.
So, in a key value coding and
observing compliant way so that
it can be used in a binding.
And another thing to tell you is that
the reason why we added this notifying
display name property to our subclass
of NSDocument is because NSDocument
has a display name property already,
but it's not KBO compliant for it.
It doesn't send out any
notifications when it changes.
So to get around that,
because you want to show the
real display name to the user,
we just added this other property.
It was pretty easy.
So SKT Document Controller.
Now, I'd mentioned that we have to
figure out some rules about when
we're going to batch windows or
documents into single windows.
And what we've done here to
implement those rules in our subclass
Venice Document Controller is
override the method that gets
invoked for each document.
Open document with contents URL,
display error.
And what we do is if--
because in this method,
we don't really know if this document
is going to be just open by itself.
The user just double
clicked on it by itself.
Or it's part of a big batch
that the user opened in Finder.
And at this point,
you may be asking yourself a question,
well,
why doesn't a document controller have
open documents with contents of URLs?
And that's a good question.
But it doesn't have
such a method right now.
So we have to do a little
bit of coalescing with these
files as they get opened.
So what we do is we open
the documents right away,
but we don't display them.
We put that off until we know how
many documents need to get displayed.
And by display,
I mean having a window open on it.
So what we do is we just collect them in
a mutable array and schedule something
to happen at the end of the run loop,
you know, display pending documents.
What Display Pending Documents does
is if the document count is one,
you know, the user only clicked on
one document at a time,
it just does what a document
controller would have done if we
hadn't fooled with it by overriding,
you know, open document contents URL.
Just make window controllers
and show windows.
Now if we have a bunch
of documents to open,
What we do is we create one
window controller and we add it
to each one of the documents.
So it's called Add Window Controller,
but really we're just,
but there's really only going to be
one window controller per document,
even though there's multiple
documents per window controller.
So basically we're just telling the
document controller about each one,
I'm sorry,
we're telling each document about
the window controller it should use.
And it's the same window
controller over and over.
And then we make the first document
the current one after all that.
That's the one that the user would
expect to pop up in the front.
And then we show the window controller.
So we also created our own
subclass of window controller
here just for this purpose,
with a nice long descriptive name.
And just to introduce it, you know,
this is setting up a bunch of
bindings with the graphic view.
One of the design decisions we
made is that there would just
be one graphic view per window,
and what it was being displayed
would be bound to the current
document of the window controller,
and if the current document changes,
that's fine.
So, you know, the graphic view is bound
to a keypath document.crawl,
and if the current document changes,
that's fine.
And that's just regular stuff
in WindowDidLoad that we
would have done for Sketch,
whether it supported multiple
windows per document or not.
So here in setDocument,
this is pretty interesting.
NSDocument always invokes this
method for each one of the window
controllers that is added to it.
And we really have to take advantage of,
you know, what's being invoked when
information like that.
So we do a couple things.
Number one,
NSWindowController is KVO compliant.
I'm sorry,
this particular window controller
is KVO compliant for something
called the graphics controller,
which is the NSDocument.
So we have one NSRA controller
that the graphic view is bound
to so it can get its selection.
Well, we want to store selection
on a per-document basis,
so we have one
NSRA controller per document.
And here, this is just the KVO compliant
way to tell the graphic viewer,
whoever is bound to this, that, you know,
this graphics controller thing
is going to change because the
current document is going to change
because we're in setDocument.
And the first thing we do when a document
is set on the window controller is,
because we can't assume that
there's just one document,
we add the document to the
list that we're maintaining.
And we do it in a KVO-compliant way.
You know, this method name,
the fact that it matches
the KVC-compliant method
name for documents matters.
Now that we've invoked it,
anybody who's observing
the set of documents,
like that pop-up that you
saw in the main window,
will hear about the change
to the list of documents.
And they'll also hear about the
change in the current document.
And here I'll just show you real
quick here in Insert Object.
This is what I was talking about with,
number one,
recording the list of documents,
and then also creating a new array
controller that goes with the document.
And then an SKT draw document.
Just a few more things we have to
override to make all this work.
The first one is that we have to
disable some unfortunate behavior
in NSDocument's addWindowController.
What it does is whenever you
invoke addWindowController,
for some reason,
it looks to see if there's another
document already on that window
controller and just kicks it off.
Just makes it, you know,
tells it to go away.
And sends it setDocumentNill.
Well, we don't want that to happen.
So we just added a quick check.
Um...
If we're in the middle
of add window controller,
or I'm sorry, here.
If we're in the middle
of add window controller,
if we're not in the middle of add
window controller for some other window,
for some other document,
then only then do we do the
remove window controller.
So this is what I was talking
about with the what's and
when's of what gets invoked.
Now another thing that we have
to tackle with this is we have to
override the sentence document method
should close window controller,
delegate should close
selector context info.
Because any particular document,
you know,
the default implementation assumes that
the document owns the window controller.
Well, it doesn't really in this case.
So we had to make our document subclass
a little bit smarter than that.
And what it does is it basically invokes
the default implementation in a way
that makes sure that it gets called
back before passing it on to whoever
was calling that in the first place.
So, and basically it tells
whoever was calling,
no, don't close the window controller,
but then it goes ahead and
closes the document anyway,
because that's the right
thing to do at this point.
Something else we have to add to the
subclass of NSDocument is we have
to tell any window controllers that
are attached to the document that
this document is about to close.
And we just added a new method to
our own window controller class.
And what it does is very simple.
It just records that there's a
document being closed so that when
it itself gets a close message,
it knows that it's coming
from a specific document.
A little bit of internal knowledge,
only NS document ever sends the
closed message to window controllers.
So this is the kind of stuff you have
to know to do this kind of interface.
So, yeah.
So after all that, let's run this.
And let's make a few more copies.
So we open all those,
and the document controller
figured out that,
hey, we're opening a bunch
of documents at once,
and opened them all in the same window.
And this pop-up is just bound to a
property of the window controller.
And it's just changing which--what
the current document is.
And it's the same graphic
view in each case.
And as you notice,
we took the time to make an
array controller per document
so that we have selection that
tracks the document properly.
So, oh, and one other thing.
Something I've seen people do
is overriding NSDocument display
name when they could be overriding
This name,
Window Title for Document Display Name.
This is what we overrode to just put
this little indicator here about,
you know, which document is which.
And as you close them,
they just get removed
from the list properly.
And if you have to save, you can do that.
So, and then when you close the last one,
of course, the window disappears.
That's it for multiple
windows per document.
Multiple documents per window.
So what you just saw,
in contrast to contrast it with
the earlier thing you saw with
multiple windows per document,
these two things together could be a
good example of following the precept of,
you know, simple things,
make simple things simple
and complex things possible.
You know, multiple windows on one
document was really simple.
We just had to add one method
to trigger the feature and,
you know, a validation method because we
wanted the menu item to look just so.
This last thing we did,
multiple documents per window,
as you can see, was a bunch more work.
But we could do it,
and we didn't have to use any
SPI or anything like that.
Just you needed to know
a few internal details,
but you know them now, so.
So, for more information, documentation,
sample code, and other resources,
the typical URL.
So, the sample code that I've
just been showing you isn't on
the disk image you have yet.
So, and it's probably not going to
be available any time this week
because it has to go through
this DTS sample code process,
which sounds quite grueling,
but probably just boils
down to a bunch of emails.
But eventually, the end result of this
will be that Sketch,
the sample code,
is going to be up on the DTS website,
and I can, you know,
update it and get new things out to
you without having to wait for the
next major shipping release or the
next WWDC or something like that.
So, now that we've rewritten Sketch and
it's being worked on rather actively,
you should start to see a bunch
of new things appear in it.
So who to contact for more information?
The person to point you in the right
direction for stuff is Matt Formica,
mformica@apple.com.
and related sessions.
I would recommend the
Cocoa Tiger Makeover
later on this afternoon.
And also, oh,
something I left out is I did get
permission to give away copies of the
sketch sample code as it is right now.
So if you catch me in that
Cocoa Tiger Makeover lab,
I'll plug in my iPod shuffle to
your computer and you can have
a copy of everything that we've
just been looking at even before
it goes through all the review.
So, and of course on Friday morning is
the feedback session so you can share
your opinions about whatever you like.